[CHALK ON BLACKBOARD]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[ALARM BEEPING]
>>It seems really
odd in today's world
that we have more
than ever before.
And yet, we think in
a very lack state.
There's a world of abundance
and an attitude of lack.
>>The problem is that we
are not eating food anymore.
We are eating
food-like products.
And they're adorned.
They are made to look
better and smell better
so that people are
attracted to them.
>>Marketing,
essentially, lies to you.
Because it presents
you with the promise,
you're going to be sexy
and popular and cool.
But in reality,
you're going to be
obese and miserable and sick.
>>I think we are barking
up the wrong tree.
People are looking for a
result that is superficial.
They are looking
just to look good.
And they don't really
consider that that could
be done from the inside out.
>>The first chapter
of the first book
that I ever wrote was
called, "Diets Don't work."
Because they're temporary.
They have failure
built right in to them.
>>You can lose weight on a diet.
But it's a little bit
like borrowing from Peter
to pay Paul.
I mean, you can get 10
pounds off your body
through sheer force.
But you're going to have
to pay back with interest.
>>People know this.
So why are highly intelligent
people not stopping?
Because they don't know
the nature of the trap.
>>There was a point
where I had allowed
myself to get to 300 pounds.
And that world-- as opposed
to the current world--
is vastly different.
>>Life just was
not fun, you know.
The only fun I had was watching
people on TV having fun.
>>I was over 400 pounds.
And I had very bad sleep apnea.
I was borderline
type-two diabetic.
>>I was a cheeseburger
away from a heart attack.
And I said, no more.
>>This is how we are as mammals.
It's not your fault.
You're programmed
to put on fat whenever
there is food available.
>>I was 31 when I realized,
I don't know what I'm doing.
I don't know how to
take care of myself.
And I am sick.
And so I had to go back
and learn all the things
I wish I had known as a child.
>>Sugar is, without question,
the cocaine of the food world.
But they kind of get away
with hiding that drug within,
quote, unquote, "food."
>>Sugar is in everything.
In America, we're eating about
22 teaspoons of sugar a day.
>>When we get onto
our real diet,
in the sense of what
a species habitually
eats to sustain
itself, we don't have
to think about these
things anymore.
This is a really
prevalent problem today.
Because people are overfed.
But they're also
starving to death.
>>We're violating our
bodies' basic survival laws.
The whole dieting
paradigm is flawed.
>>It's not just
what you're eating.
It's also what's eating you.
>>All through our
history as a species,
the big challenge
is to find calories.
And so, our bodies are
biological adapted to this.
We seek calorie sources.
When I say that, particularly,
what I'm talking about
are fats and sugars.
If we taste something
fatty or something sweet,
we get an immediate
signal saying, yes.
I want more of this.
Because for our hunter-gatherer
ancestors-- and that goes right
up to a few hundred
years ago-- anywhere
they could find fat or
sugar meant survival
for those people.
It meant carrying
forth their genetics.
>>It's not your fault. This
is how we are as mammals.
I mean, we've lived on
the Earth for millennium
where there was a food shortage.
You're programmed to
put on fat whenever
there is food available.
But now, there's a
lot of food available,
but it's the wrong kind.
And so, we've been
programmed for millennia
to store up for the winter.
But the winter doesn't come.
>>Thousands of years ago
when we lived outdoors
and we didn't know where our
next meal was coming from,
if there was a famine--
because it was a cold winter
or whatever reason--
your body is
going to want to hold
extra weight to protect you
from that.
And a famine is a stress.
And if you go
through that stress,
your body's going to say,
we need an extra 10 pounds
to protect us against famines.
>>But one of the really
interesting things
about hunter-gatherer
people, people
who do a very moderate amount
of agriculture-- we could call
them hunter-gatherer-gardeners--
what we see in those people
is that they have an extremely
high amount of nutrition,
an extremely low amount
of calories in their food
compared to people in
modern civilization, which
have a very high
amount of calories
and a very low amount of
nutrition available to them.
Today, we have so
many calorie sources.
But we still have
the same signal.
So somebody bites
into a burger or they
take a sip off a
milkshake, and they get
those fats and those sugars.
And their body says, yes, more.
Because it's used to behaving
in an environment where there's
feast and there's famine.
The problem is we got feast
like nobody's business,
we just don't have any famine.
>>You could be eating
to your heart's content,
you could eat 10,000
calories a day,
and if you're not getting
the specific nutrients
your body needs in a way that
they can digest and assimilate,
then you're starving
on a nutritional basis.
And as long as you're starving
on a nutritional basis,
your body's going to
stay hungry to get
those specific nutrients.
Now, man-made foods--
like bread and sugar
and table salt, as
a matter of fact--
trick your body
into thinking you're
getting specific nutrients.
And so, your body
stays hungry for them.
But then, the cells
don't get nourished.
And as long as the cells
aren't getting nourished,
you're starving on
a cellular level.
>>So what happens for
a average person is,
today, in our civilization, is
they are not getting enough,
say, vitamin A. They're not
getting enough vitamin D.
They're not even getting enough
vitamin C. They're chronically
starved of nutrients.
So they keep eating
and eating and eating.
But the foods that
they keep eating
don't have enough
of these nutrients
for them ever to get the
stock that they need.
But what those foods do
have is a lot of calories.
So what happens is
they start to pack
these calories onto their
body in the form of body fat.
And the body starts to
accumulate, or bio-accumulate,
too much-- not
just fat, but also
all of the associated pollutants
that are in that food supply.
We see things like diabetes.
We see blood sugar
imbalance issues.
And we see a lot of weight gain.
And so, this is a really
prevalent problem today.
Because people are overfed.
But they're also
starving to death.
>>I was 31 when I realized,
I don't know what I'm doing.
I don't know how to
take care of myself.
And I am sick.
And so, I had to go back
and learn all the things
that I wish I had known
as a child, as a teenager,
as a young adult.
Step one was just going
back and understanding,
how do I take care of myself?
What do I put in this body that
is compromised at this point?
How do I boost my immune system?
How do I increase my longevity?
And again, that comes back to
what you eat, what you drink,
and what you think.
>>From a very cursory,
surface perspective,
what's actually happened
is is that we left farms.
We got to living in cities and
forgot about our instincts.
And that's led to
an obesity crisis.
It's led to a crisis of
misunderstanding of what
a natural diet includes.
And it's also left us with
a little bit of a despair
and confusion.
We don't know what to do now.
>>The problem is that we
are not eating food anymore.
We are eating
food-like products.
And they are adorned.
They are made to look
better and smell better
and be presented so that
people are attracted to them.
And not only that, they
also made so that they
can have a long shelf life.
Otherwise, the supermarket
would be losing money,
and the manufacturers as well.
So the objective is
not really to give you
a healthy product-- is to give
you a product that will make
you buy it, that will
last long, and that
will be make a lot of
profit for the company that
is producing it, right.
>>Ugh.
OK.
9:15, could be worse.
Oh yeah, it's worse.
Oh my goodness.
It's Jason.
>>Hi there.
>>Hi.
>>Your hair looks nice today.
>>He likes my hair.
Hey, what's that
supposed to mean?
What about every other day?
He's looking at you.
Quick, say something!
>>Thanks, you too.
>>We've got this
processed junk-food diet
that people are on.
But it's also combined
with this relatively new
indoor lifestyle.
You know, our bodies
were not designed
to sit at desks under
fluorescent lights in an office
cubicle and chow down
processed junk food all day
long without getting exercise.
And, if you do just one of these
things, it may not be so bad.
But by combining them both,
then you end up with a disaster.
You've got way too many
calories, not enough nutrients,
and not enough use
of those categories.
>>And those particular factors,
when combined together,
create an obesity epidemic.
They create a
low-energy epidemic.
They create a fog in cognition.
They create an environment where
people begin to lose the will
to take self-responsibility.
So then, they turn it all over
to a doctor whose only able
to prescribe a
pharmaceutical pill which
doesn't address the
real symptoms, which
are varied and complex.
>>For me, the biggest
cause of obesity, bar none,
is addiction.
But to understand the level
of addiction that we've got
might be challenging for some.
Because, of course, people
can understand the addiction
to cigarettes.
Because that has
now been proven.
They can understand the
addiction to alcohol.
But with food, people say,
look, I can stop eating.
But unfortunately, like
the tobacco companies--
if you go back in the
late '60s, early '70s--
and they knowingly added more
nicotine to cigarettes in order
to make them addictive.
I used to smoke 40,
60 cigarettes a day.
Why did I?
One cigarettes led
to a chain reaction
that then led to another one,
and another one, another one.
I say to people,
look, the reason why
I smoke is because I enjoy it.
Because I love it.
But I would hit my
head on the pillow,
praying I would wake up and
become a non-smoker every day.
Every smoker on Earth would
love to not want cigarettes
if they could.
There is an invisible
prison, if you will,
that captures people
in the nicotine trap.
The need for a cigarette is
only cause by the last one.
Because when you
have a cigarette,
nicotine goes in your system.
Nicotine has to get out of
your system, or you will die.
When somebody has a
cigarette, after they're
withdrawing from nicotine,
it replaces the nicotine back
into their bloodstream.
And they feel better.
They feel good.
But that's like putting
on a pair of tight shoes
to get the pleasure
of taking them off.
And the way that
cigarettes are addictive
is much in the same way that
certain foods are addictive.
They know why they
shouldn't do it.
But they have no idea
why they are doing it.
>>The food companies
engineer addictions,
I believe, into
many of the foods.
>>The food industry is
multi-billions-- tens
of billions of
dollars-- and they
have the wherewithal and
the science resources
to really identify very
carefully what appeals
to the average consumer.
And as a result
of that, they can
use these chemical derivatives
to create these concoctions,
which really taste
quite good and can
have an addictive component.
>>MSG is in 80% of
all flavored foods
that you get at a
restaurant, that you
get at a grocery store.
It makes you want to eat more.
But it does something
else-- it actually
excites a part of
your brain that's
in charge of the fat programs.
The chemical of MSG
excites the brain.
And due to that excitation, your
body activates the fat programs
and gets fatter.
And everybody knows this.
Like, scientists know this.
Everybody knows this.
And no one's saying anything.
How do I know
everybody knows this?
Well, when you want
to study obesity
and you want to
study a fact mouse,
you've got to make a mouse fat.
Because mice aren't fat.
So the way you make a mouse
fat is you feed him MSG.
And there's even a term for
it, MSG obesity induced mice.
If you do a search for
MSG obesity induced mice,
you'll see tons of
research reports
where they talk about,
well, the protocol
was we made the mouse fat,
feeding him this much MSG.
Bla-bla-bla-bla-bla.
And then, we studied this,
this, this, and the other thing.
They're not studying that.
Just, that's the
protocol for making
a mouse fat is feeding him MSG.
And this is in 80%
of modern day foods.
>>A food, let's say a processed,
refined-sugar food or a soda,
it will deliver something,
a biochemical change
in your brain.
It will make you momentarily
uplifted or momentarily happy.
And people get used
to that feeling.
And they want to slam
cookies or cake or soda
to get that momentary
feeling of feeling elated.
But then, that feeling
very quickly drops off.
And you're left empty.
You know, where's the food?
Where's the nutrients?
Where are the things that the
body and the mind really crave?
And the answer, from the food
companies' point of view,
is to go back and
buy another can.
>>If I was in the food industry,
what am I looking to do?
I want to sell you more food.
That's all I want to do.
Now, how can I do that?
I can manipulate the chemical
structure of their food
so that, now, it becomes
not fulfilling, but empty--
but gives the impression when
they very first ingest it,
that it is the most fulfilling
thing they've ever had.
>>Nothing else does it in your
brain quite like a diet cola.
And that's because there's
a deadly combination there
of aspartame and caffeine.
And those two together
create a very unique blend
of excitotoxin that
kills off brain cells.
But before they die,
they have this excitement
that's like a buzz.
So what you find with
the diet cola addicts
is that they'll
drink, sometimes,
a liter, two liters a day.
And particularly
women do it as a way
to keep their weight down.
They don't eat.
They just have the next
buzz of diet colas.
>>Aspartame causes formaldehyde
build-up in the brain.
It causes frontal
lobe inflammation.
>>Migraines can be a common
one, visual disturbances.
>>Symptoms that mimic
multiple sclerosis.
There's headaches.
There's neurologic problems.
>>--Seizures in
more serious cases.
>>--Cognitive problems.
And can, in fact, lead to
different types of cancer.
>>Actually, as most
pilots are aware,
they can't drink diet sodas.
Because it's well-recognized
within the pilot association
that you just don't drink this.
Because it can really
cause severe aberrations
to your vision that
will potentially
lead to problems
with your flying.
>>If you look at
the studies that
examined the toxicity of
aspartame done by Dr. Walton,
of the 90 studies that were
done that showed that there was
no side effects from
aspartame, over 90% of those
were funded by industry.
And you have almost the
same number of other studies
that were independently
funded finding
the exact reverse, 90% of
them showing problems with it.
>>Some of the
artificial sweeteners
have been proven, not
only to have horrific side
effects over a
long period of use,
but they cause
carbohydrate cravings.
So when somebody
has a diet drink
and they're wondering why
they're not getting thin
and why they're craving
even more carbohydrates,
it's because those substances
have been very, very carefully
designed, not to help you.
They're into just
selling and marketing.
>>So yeah, there's zero
calories in diet soda.
But studies have shown that
if you drink diet soda,
within a couple
of years, you will
be fatter than when you first
started drinking the diet soda.
>>Unfortunately, when a food
additive, like aspartame
or any artificial
sweetener is manufactured,
the process of getting
approval is really
that the manufacturer--
the company that's
making it-- is the one
the funds the studies.
And those are the
studies that are
submitted to the regulatory
agency to provide approval.
So it's not this independent,
third-party, objective
evaluation that's being done,
like most people's impression.
I think most people
believe the FDA actually
has their own scientists
that do this analysis.
But nothing could be
further from the truth.
It basically
evaluates the studies
that the industry
submits that they funded.
>>So we know that
the food companies
realize that many of their
ingredients are very addictive.
And you know, the tobacco
companies did it for decades.
They're still doing it.
If you addict a customer,
you have a customer for life.
Food companies do much the same
thing with different chemicals.
It's not nicotine.
It's the MSG.
It's the processed sugars.
It's the aspartame.
It's these other chemicals.
But it's the same idea.
It's just like
selling cigarettes.
You're selling food
that's harmful,
and you want people
to keep coming back.
So you put in those
chemicals that make
them want it again and again.
>>The marketing,
essentially, lies to you.
Because it presents you with
this image of a can of soda,
let's say.
And it doesn't tell
you what's in the can.
What it says is that this
can, if you drink it,
it's going to bring you these
benefits by association.
You're going to be cool.
You're going to be sexy.
You're going to be happy.
You're going to be surrounded by
friends, wearing skimpy bikinis
or whatever their
message happens to be.
This is a lie.
The truth is, if you
drink that soda, you're
going to lose bone
mineral density,
because of the phosphoric
acid it contains.
If it's a diet soda, you may
suffer neurological problems
due to the chemical sweeteners.
And if it's not a
diet soda, it probably
is made with high fructose
corn syrup in North America
and elsewhere around the world.
And that's going to
promote diabetes,
type two, and obesity.
So on one hand,
here's the promise.
You're going to be sexy
and popular and cool.
But in reality,
you're going to be
obese and miserable
and unhealthy and sick.
The marketers are
telling you this.
But what they deliver is this.
>>We are now coming to a
point where we are wary,
more and more people are
wary about just falling
into this marketing of zero
calories, no fat, no sugar,
types of messages.
>>Many of the food labels
at the grocery store
are very deceptive.
For example, there's
a cereal made
by General Mills called Total,
Blueberry Pomegranate cereal.
It contains no blueberries
and no pomegranates.
You might wonder, well, how
do they come up with the name?
And the naming of food
products often is a little
too loose and creative.
It's almost as if they're
naming these products--
and this is from the major
food companies whose products
are in every major grocery store
all around the world-- it's
almost as if their naming
them based on what they hope
you might imagine
you're eating, rather
than what's really in the box.
Because a lot of times,
it's not in there.
And then there's stuff that
is in there that they don't
want you to see on the label.
So they don't put
it on the label,
such as propylene glycol.
This chemical is used in a
lot of blueberry muffins.
It's part of what makes
up the blueberry bits that
aren't blueberries.
They're made of propylene
glycol, partially hydrogenated
oils, liquid sugars,
and artificial colors.
You can also use propylene
glycol to winterize your RV.
It prevents the pipes from
freezing in the winter.
It's also used to clean out
your colon before a colonoscopy.
So multiple uses for this
ingredient that you're get
in your blueberry muffins.
>>America loves enemies.
And America chooses an enemy
and deploys all its forces
against it, right?
So at some point,
when we were noticing
that we were getting fat as
a population, we attacked.
The enemy was fat.
And everything became
fat-free, fat-free this
and fat-free that.
And the calories that
fat were occupying
were replaced by,
mostly, carbohydrates.
That resulted in the fattest
country in the world.
>>Fat-free normally means
it's loaded with sugar.
I can get a two pound bag
of sugar in my hand now.
And I can put a label
that says, 100% fat-free.
The fact that once
the sugar is ingested
will turn into fat in
the body-- because why?
Because it sends the
sugar levels sky high.
And what does the pancreas do?
It has to secrete
insulin in order
to bring that down
so you don't die.
Insulin is the
fat-producing hormone.
So the 2 pound bag
of sugar that I
put 100% fat-free,
although factually correct,
is unbelievably misleading.
So all this excess energy
comes along and says,
where can we store it?
Short-term places-- liver.
But what do we do
with the excess?
I know what we'll do.
We'll produce some fat
cells, store them in there,
use them later.
Problem is, there's
never a later.
>>Fat is really good for you
if it's the right kind of fat.
And that's the key.
It's getting the right
kind of fat in your body.
If you're on a low-fat
diet of some kind,
you're constantly hungry.
Why?
Because you need the correct
fats and proteins to feel
satiated.
And so therefore, if you
negate that side of what
the body is crying
out for, you'll
be constantly looking for it.
>>We know that the
cheap, low-grade fats--
such as soybean oil and even
canola oil and the corn oils--
are not healthy for you to
consume in large quantities
over the long-term.
The worst kinds of fats are the
partially hydrogenated fats.
These are the
hydrogenated oils that
are used in many baked items
and crackers and cookies
and margarine spreads.
You know, the butter spreads?
Oh, those are some of the worst
foods you could possibly eat.
If you want healthy
fats, then you've
got to get into the natural,
plant-based fats from avocados,
and chia seeds, and
flax seeds, and even
healthy fat from salmon.
Wild caught salmon, that's
a healthy fat for you.
>>[LAUGHS] You want a bite?
>>I thought you loved me.
>>I do.
Take two bites.
>>No, it's got high
fructose corn syrup in it.
>>So?
>>Well, you know what
they say about it?
>>What?
>>That it's--
>>When it comes to high fructose
corn syrup, a lot of people
don't realize the dangers of
refining and concentrating
ingredients from a product.
>>In the '70s, a
Japanese scientist
developed the technology
to separate fructose
from corn, thus
radically reducing
the cost of this
high fructose corn
syrup relative to
traditional forms of sugar.
>>So high fructose corn syrup
comes from corn, obviously.
But it's not natural.
Because it's so
concentrated and so refined.
It's an isolated nutrient.
For example, cocaine is probably
not good for your health.
But it comes from the coca leaf.
And coca leaf tea is perfectly
safe for your health.
I drank it when I was hiking
in the Andes Mountains.
And it's used throughout
the culture there.
It's a very important
nutraceutical,
medicinal plant that's used
throughout South America.
And there's no harm
in drinking coca tea.
And it's not addictive,
nothing like that.
But you wouldn't want to
snort cocaine from the highly
refined coca tea.
Well, eating high fructose
corn syrup, in my view,
is a lot like snorting cocaine.
It is the highly refined,
isolated, concentrated,
chemically manipulated
version of something
that's found in corn
and grown in corn.
>>It's very similar to
what white sugar is.
White sugar is the purified
sucrose extracted out of, say,
beets or sugar cane.
It's a pharmaceutical sugar.
Well, white flour is a
pharmaceutical carbohydrate,
in the same way that
cocaine is extracted out
of the coca plant.
So you have the native
cocaine in the matrix
of the plant itself, or you
have the pharmaceutical version.
To me, white sugar,
cocaine, white flour,
they all fall in
the same category
of a whitened, extracted,
purified substance that's
drawn out of the plant kingdom.
All of them create
imbalances in the body
and lead to a host of problems.
>>But if you eat
corn, it's fine.
You're not going to get that
much high fructose corn syrup.
>>The number one source of
calories in the United States
is fructose.
And fructose is
highly addictive.
In the 1900s, the average
person was exposed
to about 15 grams of fructose.
And the fructose, another
term for that is fruit sugar.
And of course, it's why
most fruits are sweet.
And fructose in small
amounts-- 15, 25
grams, which is less
than an ounce a day--
is probably OK and healthy.
But the average person is
consuming 70 to 80 grams a day.
And there are many kids,
primarily teenagers,
who are taking 120, 150
grams of fructose a day,
literally 10 times the amount
they were taking a century ago.
So when you abuse
that type of sugar
and you have that
exposure, it has
some very severe
metabolic consequences
that can lead to these
addictive process,
and change brain
chemistry, and really make
it very difficult to
get out of this cycle
where you have
these food cravings,
and really addicted
to food that's
not going to make you healthy.
>>And in terms of just
the glycemic index,
high fructose corn syrup is
like jet fuel for your body.
You know, if you pour jet fuel
into your car's gasoline tank,
you're going to
ruin your engine.
You'll burn it out.
Much the same thing
happens in the human body.
You can find high fructose
corn syrup in so many products
in the stores, it
would amaze you.
If you turn them around and
looked at the ingredients,
you'd say, no way, I can't
believe it's in here.
Salad dressings will have it.
You'll have high fructose corn
syrup in, like, pasta sauces.
And pizza sauce especially,
is loaded with it.
You really have to watch out
for everything in the grocery
store.
Read it.
Make sure it doesn't contain
this high fructose corn
syrup and other ingredients
that are dangerous.
Stay away from the isolates.
Stay away from high
fructose corn syrup.
Stay away from anything that
is an unnatural and highly
concentrated chemical
from a plant that
should be consumed
in its full spectrum,
bio-available,
nutrient complexity.
That's the way nature delivers
food, as a nutrient complex,
not as one isolated nutrient.
One of the most
important realizations
that people need to get on
to here when they're eating
is that the breads and any of
these fluffy carbohydrates,
they're converted into
sugar right in your body.
So within minutes after you
eat them, they become sugar.
So a lot of people
say, well, I'm
avoiding sugar
because they're not
eating crystallized
sugar in that form
or drinking liquid sugar.
But they're eating a bread.
Or they're eating a pancake
or a muffin or a cornbread.
Cornbread used to be made
out of corn and not sugar.
Now it's like corn cake.
It's sugarized corn cake.
And when you eat that, that
becomes sugar internally
and has a very high glycemic
index and a high glycemic load.
[TYPING]
>>I'm just going to lunch.
>>So when you're thinking
about what to eat,
if you're working to
reduce your sugars,
your definition of "what is
sugar" really needs to expand.
It's more than just
the white powder.
>>It's breads, pasta, cereal,
rice, potatoes, corn, waffles,
pancakes.
You know, pretty much
any food for breakfast
that most people eat.
>>In America, we're
eating about 150 pounds
of sugar per year, each person.
79 pounds of high
fructose corn syrup.
That's about 22
teaspoons of sugar a day.
OK, so there's nothing
moderate about that.
Sugar is in everything,
everything from cough syrup
to crackers to sushi.
I mean, it's very hard to avoid.
The more sugar that
we're consuming,
the more chronic disease
we're experiencing
and also these incredible ups
and downs and mood swings.
>>Because what sugar
does is it increases
beta-endorphin in the brain.
And that's a feel
good, natural opiate,
morphine-like substance.
And so, when you're depressed
or you're under stress,
you want to eat-- what do we
call them?-- comfort foods--
macaroni and cheese-- all
the foods that have a virtual
delivery system of sugar
right into body fat.
So it is not fat
that makes you fat.
It's sugar that makes you fat.
And it is very easy and
cheap to produce foods
that become sugar quickly.
>>You think of something
like a croissant.
Many people I know that
just say, you know,
I've gone on a sugar-free diet.
And I see them
eating a croissant.
And I say, that's sugar!
What do you think
is going to happen?
As soon as it enters the
bloodstream, that is sugar.
>>What we're really talking
about is getting that hit,
getting that sugar high,
getting that beta-endorphin rush
that people are looking
for to soothe themselves
when they are under stress.
But once you understand
that sugar is a drug,
just like alcohol is a drug!
And so what happens with
any addiction is this,
you become habituated
to the effect.
And therefore, you need
more and more and more over
time to give you
the same effect.
It's no different
than it is with sugar.
>>We know the problems
caused by something
like purified cocaine.
We know that causes problems.
We're comfortable with
referring to that as a drug.
We're becoming culturally
more comfortable
with recognizing
white sugar as a drug.
I think people are
starting to understand how
addictive a substance it is.
>>Now, if you walk the aisles
in the average grocery store
and you look at the amount of
sugar in a child's breakfast
cereal, you might as well be
rolling up the kid's sleeve
and putting in heroin.
Because it's the same.
>>Milk ain't good
enough anymore.
Because someone at
the milk boards,
right-- and don't get me wrong.
I support milk.
But someone at the milk board
probably paid a lot of money
for some geezer to work out that
if you put loads of flavorings
and colorings and sugar in milk,
right, more kids will drink it.
For me, there ain't no
need to flavor the milk.
OK, there's sugar in everything.
I know the ins and outs
of those ingredients.
It's in everything.
Even the milk hasn't escaped
the kind of modern day problems.
There's our milk.
There's our carton.
In that is nearly as much sugar
as one of your favorite cans
of fizzy pop.
And they're having two a day.
So let me just show you.
We've got one kid here
having eight tablespoons
of sugar a day.
You know, there's your week.
There's your month.
And I've took the
liberty of putting
in just the five years of
elementary school sugar,
just from milk.
Now, I don't know
about you guys,
but judging the circumstances,
any judge in the whole world
would look at the
statistics and the evidence,
and they would find any
government of old guilty
of child abuse.
That's my belief.
[APPLAUSE]
>>The challenge we have with
food or, in particular, sugar
is because it's illegal to
give a child a cigarette.
And so it should be.
It is illegal to
give a child alcohol.
It's not illegal to give a child
white refined sugar or refined
fats.
Food, as far as I'm
concerned, kills more people
than all drugs on
Earth combined.
And again, to go back to the
beginning, people know this.
So why are highly intelligent
people not stopping?
Because they don't know
the nature of the trap.
I used to be so addicted to
sugar that I would literally
throw my food out and
dig through the garbage.
So I'd go get ice cream and
Ben and Jerry's and doughnuts
and-- I'd have a pig-out fest.
And I would have to throw
my food in the garbage.
And then, I got to point where
I would dig through the garbage
and get the sugar.
And then, I got to a
point where the only way
I wouldn't dig
through the garbage
was to spray it with Windex.
So you tell me that that's
healthy and in balance.
>>Now, we think about--
"woo!" --cocaine, heroin,
all these big drugs.
But the truth is
that premature death
is coming from sugar and
alcohol and smoking, of course.
So if you begin to think about
these massive doses of sugar
as no different from
drugs and alcohol,
then you get a handle
on the situation.
>>Hey everyone, welcome back.
Now, I'd like to introduce
you to a special guest I have
with me in the studio,
Harvey Diamond, health
guru and the author
of "Fit for Life."
Harvey is here to talk
to us about something
he is very passionate
about, dieting.
Harvey, tell us what
you think about diets.
>>So many people want to know
about diets, because people
are going to try them.
But they don't work.
The first chapter of the
first book I ever wrote
was called "Diets Don't Work."
It's because they're temporary.
What they're doing is taking
one of the food categories
that we must have to
live-- that's protein, fat,
carbohydrate-- and one
of those is eliminated.
And if you do that, some weight
will be lost temporarily.
But let me ask you
something, do you
want to be healthy temporarily?
No.
But you want to lose
weight temporarily.
They have failure
built right into them.
There was a study done at
UCLA once that said 90 to 95%
of the people who go
on a diet will not only
gain that weight back,
they will add more weight.
Because they're so happy to
be eating again that they
don't eat intelligently.
>>You can lose weight on a diet.
But it's a little bit
like borrowing from Peter
to pay Paul.
I mean, you can get 10
pounds off your body
through sheer force.
But you're going to have to
pay it back with interest.
You'll pay back with 15 pounds.
Because every time you force
yourself to lose weight,
your body is going to want to
have extra weight to protect
you from a perceived famine.
And I lived through this, where
I lose 10 pounds, gain 15,
lose 10 pounds, gain 15, until
I had gained over 200 pounds.
And when I say I tried
every diet besides meeting
face-to-face with Atkins,
going to a Pritikin--
I had naturopaths,
homeopaths, acupuncture.
I had these seeds taped to
my ear from an acupuncturist.
And they're supposed to be
like an acupressure point.
So every time you're hungry,
you're supposed to press them.
I'd walk through the
streets of New York.
Every time I'd smell pizza, I'd
sit there and press these seeds
in my ear.
This is what I lived with.
And I really did work at it.
You know, people think that
overweight people are just
weak and lazy and
over-indulgent.
I'm a very disciplined person.
But when my body
wanted to be fat,
I could not lose the weight.
>>I think we are barking
up the wrong tree.
People are looking for a
result that is superficial.
They're looking
just to look good.
And they don't really consider
that that could be done
from the inside out, right?
So people go into diets
and all these fads
in order to lose weight
and lose weight fast.
And that is just not
the way to approach it.
The results prove it.
>>We're violating our
bodies' basic survival laws
over and over and over again.
The whole dieting
paradigm is flawed.
And every diet comes
out-- every week
there's a new diet,
based on the same idea
that you can somehow force
yourself to lose weight.
And it's flawed.
It's based on a fundamental
flaw that every time you
force yourself to
lose weight, your body
will force you gain weight.
>>So I think what happens
is we set ourselves up
for failure because,
yes, you can manipulate
the ratios of calories.
You can manipulate
the ratio of fat
to protein to
carbohydrate infinitely.
We keep seeing all
these variations.
So I remember the high
carbohydrate, low fat.
And then, it's
switched to, well,
let's go high protein,
low carbohydrate.
And then, it's switched to high
fat, moderate carbohydrate.
It just keeps switching around.
And all of these
things have an effect.
Because what you're doing
is restricting calories
from people, or you're
manipulating the way
their metabolism works.
>>And that's why the Atkins
diet was so miserable for me.
Because I was so addicted to
carbs, to what I call now,
"dead food."
I was so addicted to that.
To try to go off that,
at the end of the day,
it was just miserable.
And what I used to do
is I used to swap diets.
Because the Atkins
diet is a zero carbs.
And then, the Pritikin
diet is all carbs.
So my wife used to joke with me
that I was on the Atkins diet
during the day and the
Pritikin diet at night.
Because I'd come home
at the end of the day,
and I just couldn't take going
a whole day without carbs.
I had to have bread.
>>The definition of
a diet is the foods
that a organism habitually
eats to sustain itself.
So what we're talking
about is a real diet,
in the sense of
what a species eats.
When we get onto
our real diet, we
don't have to think about
these things anymore.
But if we're going to eat
from that suite of foods that
exist in the
supermarket, we're going
to constantly have problems.
We're going to constantly
have to monitor ourselves.
Because these
foods make you fat.
So if we look
around the world, we
see human beings have been able
to inhabit the whole globe.
And they've been able to do it
on a host of different foods,
from the extreme Arctic where
people ate almost exclusively
animal fat and muscle
and organ meats,
to the jungle where
people had access
to far more fruits and
far more plant material.
We see people thriving and
people staying lean and healthy
and avoiding
degenerative disease
and not putting on
all that extra weight,
almost no matter what they eat.
Now, we are eating a diet
that no longer resembles that.
So it's kind of like,
if we lived in a zoo.
If you put a human
being in a zoo the way
you put a chimpanzee in a zoo,
well, the question would be,
what do we feed that
human in the zoo?
Well, we don't feed chimpanzees
in zoos Captain Crunch cereal,
Twinkies, and doughnuts.
We feed them a diet that
looks like the diet they
eat in their ecosystem.
We sort of live in a
zoo-like environment now.
We live in this
artificial environment.
And unfortunately, we're not
feeding ourselves the foods
we're biologically adapted to.
>>If you cut down on
any food, regardless
of what the food is, if
you say, as for Monday--
it's always a Monday.
Everyone is always going
on a diet on a Monday.
They tend to consume
enormous amounts of food
from Friday to the Sunday.
Sunday, they tend
to go shopping.
And they put in stuff that
they wouldn't ordinarily
have ever put in, fruits and
vegetables, as an example.
It's funny, because I've
been on a million diets.
And in the past, when
I went on those diets
and I was overweight
myself, I would
arrive at the check-out on the
day before my diet would begin.
I had so much healthy stuff.
I'd be so proud of my trolley.
And I'd want the check-out
person to say something.
Look, this isn't ordinary!
Look at how much fruit
and veg I've got!
I would then start on
the Monday morning.
And I would immediately
start to feel deprived.
Now, think about this.
Listen, I could have gone
sometimes till 2 o'clock
in the afternoon
not even thinking
about food when I
wasn't on a diet,
without consuming
any food sometimes.
I'd grab some water
or sometimes nothing.
I hadn't thought about it.
But the very second I told my
brain that I was on a diet,
I went into the mode of "can't."
If you go through-- I want
that, but I can't have it,
to I can have it,
but I don't want it.
There's a massive
paradigm shift.
>>Don't turn it into a diet.
Keep the focus always on adding.
For example, the
types of foods we need
are foods that
were not man-made.
Because man-made foods our body
doesn't know how to process,
doesn't know how to digest.
And it causes hormonal chaos.
It causes us to gain weight.
>>The best strategy we've got is
to just add in the good stuff.
Eventually, it's going to
crowd out the bad stuff.
And that works for everybody.
It makes everything so simple.
It completely deactivates
all the mental neuroses
we have about diets
and what we have to eat
and all that kind of stuff.
Let's just add in the cucumbers.
Let's add in the apples.
>>The simple foods, the plant
foods, the fruits, the nuts,
the seeds, the vegetables, the
animal foods of high quality--
start looking at the foods in
your house and asking yourself,
could I replace this food
with a well-grown local option
that's not as processed?
For instance, if you're
used to making pancakes out
of white flour, can you go to
a farm locally that produces
flour and stone grinds it?
Can you find that?
If you look in your fridge,
and you've got milk in there.
And you know it's
processed milk.
And it's got the
growth hormone in it.
And you know it's
pesticide laden
and you know there's puss in it.
Can you find a farm locally that
can produce that food for you
the way people used to get it?
If you've got the
bananas in your house
from the supermarket,
can you replace them
with an organic option?
Can you move in a
direction that brings you
towards the reapproximation
of your natural diet?
Can you do that?
>>You start adding that
in, all of a sudden,
all those other choices
start moving away.
Inevitably, you're going
to feel so much better
eating the good stuff that
the choice for the bad stuff
is no longer valid.
>>I had very bad sleep apnea.
I was borderline
type-two diabetic,
elevated triglycerides
and cholesterol.
I'd worked with the
late Doctor Atkins
face-to-face in New York.
And in the end,
the best thing he
could do is yell at
me for being so fat
and because I was
killing myself.
He goes, what are you doing?
You're killing yourself.
And I thought to myself,
you sold 200 million copies
of your book.
You think I'm going
to lose weight
because you're mad at me?
Is that really the
best you can do?
So I was over 400 pounds.
And after I had that
sort of epiphany
and changed my focus from diet
to finding the real reasons why
my body wanted to be fat,
I lost about 220 pounds
over a 2 and 1/2 year period.
And that was seven years ago.
>>There was a point
where I had allowed
myself get to 300 pounds.
And that world, as opposed
to the current world,
is vastly different.
>>When I was overweight
and when I was sick,
I didn't even know
that I was sick.
But I just felt that
life was passing me by.
Life was just not fun.
The only fun I had was watching
people on TV having fun.
>>It's a very dispiriting thing.
You wake up in the morning
and I was immediately aware
of my body.
And I was immediately aware
that I didn't like it.
>>It felt a little
bit like being
wrapped in a blanket with
three holes in it, OK?
Two to watch television
and one to eat.
And that's it.
>>I'd got to this point
where I was 40 years of age,
I was fat, sick,
and nearly dead.
I was 310 pounds or 141 kilos.
I was taking high doses
of steroids every day,
day and night, for eight years.
I was a cheeseburger
away from a heart attack.
And I said, no more.
You got to do something
about this, Joe.
You're not as smart as
you thought you were.
What actually happened
after that period of time
was that my body gave up
to the pressure of what
I was putting it under.
And when I talk about the
pressure I was putting it
under, it was like
lack of sleep,
poor diet, too much alcohol,
smoking, no exercise.
I mean, you throw
everything in, I had it all.
>>Now, a lot of us, we
have some healing to do.
We have recovery to do.
Because the world
we grew up in has
been such a barrage
against our nervous system,
our endocrine system.
Our health has
been under attack.
So sometimes there's going
to be a period of healing.
>>We decided as a race to
experiment with chemicals.
We created over 75,000
synthetic chemicals since 1940.
We've released them, wholesale,
into the environment.
They're in the food chain.
They're in us.
They've contaminated every
single creature on Earth.
We now have to clean up.
Now, we have to actually
turn it around and decide
that we're going to move
away from better living
through chemistry and move
towards the idea of better
living through working with
nature and natural laws.
>>And the body has two
ways of defending itself,
which are generic ways.
One of them is the
body produces mucus
to coat these chemicals so that
they buffer the irritation.
Or it retains and even
generates more fat.
Because as we said,
most of these chemicals
are lipophilic or fat-loving.
They don't dissolve in water.
They dissolve in fat.
So they attach to fat.
Now, if you just sweat
it off and force the body
into burning fat
without creating
the conditions
for the body to be
able to cleanse and detoxifying
and neutralize and make
these chemicals water-soluble
so that it can be sweated
off and peed off--
so you're burning fat
but not really getting
rid of the toxins.
These toxins are left
to cause the damage
that they were not
causing because they
were surrounded by fat.
>>So as long as you're
taking in more toxins
than you're
eliminating, your body's
not going to let you burn fat.
Because burning
the fat will just
put more toxins into your body.
So you have to address
the fact that you're
being assaulted with toxins
before your body will
allow you to let go of weight.
>>The body only wants to heal.
It's crying out to heal.
That's all it wants to do.
It wants to naturally detoxify.
Only the body can
detoxify itself,
providing there's no
toxicity coming in.
>>Probably the best thing a
person can do in the beginning
is kind of clean themselves out.
Get on, like, a
detoxification program.
Foods that detoxifying the
body, some are really obvious
and some are not.
Some of the more obvious
ones are green vegetables,
chlorophyll rich foods.
In hospitals, you
know, chlorophyll
was used as an internal
deodorant for people
who had a lot of body odor.
Chlorophyll is a great way
to clean our bodies out.
So those are, of course, all
of our well-grown, heirloom,
organic vegetables.
These are fantastic for
cleaning our bodies out.
There are some less obvious
stuff as well though,
like gelatinous plant foods.
For instance, things
like chia seeds
or aloe vera or the seaweeds.
These foods that have a gel that
they secrete when they get wet.
And what those do,
those gels move
through our intestinal tract.
If we eat something
like chia seeds,
if we can blend that
into a drink some way
or something like that and
get it into our bodies,
these gelatinous fibers move
through our intestinal track
absorbing things, binding
them, and passing them through.
Particularly what
they do is they
absorb the bile salts that
are released by the liver,
bind those up, and
pass those out,
and with it, all the
fat-soluble toxins
the liver is trying
to get rid of.
Now, if we don't have
these gelatinous fibers,
we tend to reabsorb
a lot of that.
So the liver tries to get rid of
something, puts it in the bile,
dumps it into the
small intestine,
hoping that it eventually
gets out of us.
But it gets reabsorbed.
So gelatinous fibers
can really do a lot
to clean out the liver.
>>I want to mention two other
ingredients that are especially
useful for detox.
That is parsley and cilantro.
Now, parsley cleanses
your entire blood supply.
And it also gives
you fresh breath.
Parsley has so much
chlorophyll that it just
cleanses your whole system.
And cilantro binds
with heavy metals.
Now, a lot of people are
getting mercury especially
through the fish
that they're eating
or through their
dental fillings.
And if you eat cilantro,
it can bind with that
and remove it from your
system, so the mercury
doesn't get lodged
in your body's cells.
And mercury, as you
know, is very toxic.
It's a neurotoxin.
You don't want that anywhere
in your brain cells, right?
>>But cleansing our
bodies is not complicated.
It's not difficult.
It's just going
to require high-quality
green plant food.
It's going to require
gelatinous fibers.
It's going to
require good water.
It's going to mean
needing good air.
getting sunlight.
And our body wants
to cleanse itself.
It's looking to cleanse itself.
It knows how to cleanse itself.
You don't even have to
really do very much.
Just input gentle foods.
Be out in nature.
And your body will cleanse
itself very easily.
And when the weight
starts coming off,
people become so excited
they don't want to stop.
And then, eventually, starting
to add more and more foods back
in from healthy sources
that look like the foods
they used to eat
but are actually
more satisfying and
more nutritive--
and they'll find that
they can live a life
not just being fit
and trim but actually
feeling how they've
always wanted
to feel in a body
that works properly
and that stays healthy forever.
>>For me, it's back to nature
and it's back to the garden,
right?
And if it's made in the
garden, then I eat it.
If it's made in a lab,
it takes a lab to digest.
If it has a shelf-life longer
than me, I don't eat it.
It's just common sense.
The simpler I get,
the healthier I get.
>>So as you seek to
improve your health,
you're going to want to include
certain types of foods, classes
of foods that are
typically ignored
in the American culture.
Now, this is not controversial.
The most conservative
nutritionist
will recommend that we need
six to eight servings of fruits
and vegetables, they say.
But I always like to
twist that around.
It should be
vegetables and fruits.
Because vegetables are really
the most beneficial food group
that we can have access to.
And most people are
not getting enough.
They just aren't.
I mean, you need a lot
of good vegetables.
Because they're full of the
full range of phytonutrients
and antioxidants and everything
you need to stay healthy.
Now, one of the ways that I
cheat this-- because, you know,
getting vegetables
is a challenge--
is that I do vegetable juicing.
So I'll typically
buy, I don't know,
20 pounds of vegetables
a week, maybe more
and juice a few pounds a day.
Essentially, a quart of
dark green vegetable juice
that consists of-- as a base, I
like the celery and cucumbers.
And then, I add the dark,
deep green, leafy vegetables
like kale or collards.
And there's a number of
different types of kale.
Those are the two big ones.
But then, you can also use
other dark green vegetables.
>>Juicing is important
for two main reasons.
People often say to me, well
look, why don't we just eat it?
That's a good
question, first of all.
Why don't we just eat it?
We don't.
So that's the first
thing to address.
The point is is that most people
don't consume enough raw fruits
and vegetables in a
spectrum of colors.
So that's the number one.
Secondly, most
people are overfed
and they're undernourished.
And so, their digestive
system is beaten up
over years and years
and years of trying
to digest, extract
the nutrients,
and dispose of the waste
of the wrong kind of foods.
Juicing is important as well
because it's easy to absorb.
It's the ultimate fast-food.
People say, I want
a fast-food diet.
Get juicing.
Because if you think
the average dinner
will take anything from four to
16 hours to leave the stomach,
and the body try and digest it.
Freshly extracted juice is
the 15 minute nutrient-express
to health.
That's what it is.
It goes into your stomach.
It goes, 15 minutes,
into your cells.
And also, let's be fair, you
will consume far more raw,
fresh vegetables, the
kind of vegetables
you wouldn't ordinary eat.
Juiced, mixed with a
little bit of apple,
a little bit of
pineapple, a bit of lime.
You can jazz up some of these
juice so they taste divine.
So can you imagine, you remove
refined sugars, refined fats,
junkie-type foods, all
the wheat, the breads,
the man-made foods
going into your body.
And all of a sudden,
overnight, you
replace it with
high-water content--
that's what it is--
pure high-water content,
organic-rich, mineral,
vitamin-rich fuel going
into every single
cell of your body
in the most easy to
digest and absorb form
and with a spectrum of
colors with everything
the body requires-- what do you
think the body's going to do?
>>It's not going to
reject this at all.
It's going to look and
say, now, I'm on board.
Now, you're good to me.
Let me shine for you.
>>20 years ago,
this is what I saw
when I looked in the mirror.
Looking good!
Well, the years rolled by.
And I kept seeing that same
fit-looking bloke looking back
at me.
Who was I kidding?
I didn't look like that anymore.
I looked like I
swallowed a sheep.
So then, I started to
switch to alternative paths.
And I tried everything.
I did witch doctors.
I did mud baths.
I did acupuncture.
I did the lot.
The one thing which I was
really afraid to face up to
was changing what I
put into my mouth.
>>I'd never heard of
a raw food restaurant.
Raw food?
How do you cook raw food?
>>Look at that!
Breakfast!
>>This looks like
it should be mowed.
>>It actually was mowed.
And then, it turned into that.
>>I didn't know anything
about vegetarians.
I knew Gandhi was a vegetarian.
Vegan, I thought
vegan was a planet.
I had no idea of that world.
>>So I decided to experiment.
You know, I was
fighting for life here.
What if it works?
So I went to the
farmer's market,
got a lot of veggies-- beets and
kale and all sorts of things.
It all didn't look
attractive to me.
Because there was
no dessert there.
And then, I cleansed
for three days,
just juicing, juicing, juicing,
and detoxifying my body.
>>I guess the way I look
at it was that I turned
my back on Mother Nature.
And I wanted to
conduct an experiment
where I was the lab rat.
What would happen if I ran
towards her, full steam?
Would she open her
arms and embrace me?
And would I be healed?
I went straight to juicing
and a plant-based diet.
And within, basically, 10 to
15 days, the fog had lifted.
And I was on the path.
>>After about two weeks, I did
notice my energy coming back.
And color was just a
little bit brighter.
>>Just after three days of
cleanse, I lost seven pounds.
After four months of
continuing healthy diet,
I was cancer-free.
My skin cleared.
It was first time ever that I
lost weight naturally so fast.
>>The end of the
day, you know, this
is kind of like your last
area of control in the world.
What you do with this, what you
take and what you put in here,
nobody can control you on.
[ALARM BEEPING]
>>Cleansing and detoxification,
as a side-effect,
will make you lose weight,
will make your eyes white,
will make your skin glow.
There's no need to
think about that, right?
Those are side-effects of
cleansing and detoxification.
>>Whatever you're
going for, I think
that you can
ultimately get it when
you start to change
your diet and lifestyle.
A lot of people look
at me and they're like,
you must be in your 20s.
Well, no, I'm not.
And that's always
a nice compliment.
I love hearing that people think
I'm a lot younger than I am.
I'm, you know,
heading into my 40s.
And certainly, I think that
this lifestyle has helped me
not only with a chronic
disease but also feel young, be
young in my skin, and--
depending on the lighting--
look pretty good too.
>>The truth is that we are
programmed, as a species,
to be attracted to the
people who look good.
Why?
Because they're the
healthiest ones.
>>We are naturally designed to
screen each other for health
for reproductive purposes.
We look at each other,
and we see glowing skin,
we see shining eyes.
And that's sexy to us.
A confident person
is sexy to us.
>>Unconsciously, people
look for symmetry.
They look for a steady skin tone
and not a lot of splotchy type
of colors on your skin.
Why?
Why is this built into
our definition of beauty?
Why does the beauty
industry spend
so much time trying
to create products
that they put on your
skin to make your skin
look artificially monotone?
Well, the answer is
because those are the cues
that we pick up on.
It makes you look
younger or sexier.
>>Ultimately, that to me
is what we're striving for,
is a deep richness of
skin tone, a deep richness
of hair, a lustre in our
nails, an overall feeling
of shine and glow and
even almost an aura.
This is possible
through natural foods.
And this is possible
through certain strategies
of using natural foods
and certain supplements.
>>Through juicing especially,
and by avoiding fried foods,
and avoiding the highly oxidated
foods that destroy your skin
and destroy your
internal organs.
Fried foods are the worst, in
my opinion, and barbecued foods.
They're highly toxic, loaded
with carcinogenic chemicals.
If you can avoid those, or at
least greatly reduce those,
and increase your intake
of super foods-- chlorella
and spirulina, fresh juice
from vegetables and fruits
that you make in your own
kitchen-- then your skin,
within 30 days, will
turnaround completely.
Your friends will ask
you, what's your secret?
And when you tell them, I've
been juicing fresh produce.
They'll say, well, I'm just
going buy a skin cream.
Because they want
the easier way.
But if you have
good friends, they
might start juicing with you.
Because your juice
beats their skin cream.
>>See, the skin is a true
symbol of our health.
Because it's the last
place to get nutrition.
And if you can drive all
those nutrients all the way
through to the
skin, then you know
it's gotten everywhere else too.
And that's something
that we all recognize.
If somebody's got
beautiful skin,
it tells us and invites us
to a deeper understanding
about what's going
on inside their body.
We know that they're
generally having
healthier liver, kidneys,
heart, lungs, et cetera.
>>So let's take vanity,
it's a very good entry way.
Because your skin looks better
when you're eating a diet
that is low glycemic, where
the blood sugar is stable.
As a matter of fact, that's
one of the first things
that happens.
Your skin, your hair, your
nails begin to look better.
One of the reasons
that I, personally,
stopped eating so many grains
and high glycemic foods is,
over the years, I noticed
a couple of things.
First of all, there was weight
gain, every year a little more.
And every year, harder
and harder to keep off.
Second, me and my
patients all started
to have fingernails that
broke, hair that broke,
and skin that was getting all
red and broken blood vessels,
and all of that stuff.
When you eat well,
that goes away.
>>We can only eat
so much in a day.
Therefore, the idea
of eating for beauty,
let's make those foods
beauty foods, like olive oil
and olives, cucumbers,
radishes, hemp seeds, aloe vera,
coconut products.
>>Properly fermented food--
I'm talking about yogurt.
I'm talking about kimchi.
I'm talking about sauerkraut.
We use those foods
to help us digest
and to replenish
the bacteria that
colonizes our intestinal tract.
>>Let's focus on the
beauty minerals--
like silica and
iron and manganese--
that give glow and
charisma; sulphur
and what it does to
our connective tissue
and how it reverses
age-related lines
and how it fills out
our protein make-up so
that our musculature
and our overall build
reflects the higher qualities--
almost the symbolic qualities--
that beauty points to.
The cosmetic industry seems to
be a wholesale dumping ground
for just about every
single type of chemical
that exists from lead compounds,
mercury compounds, compounds
that are made from horse
urine, namely urea.
There are all different
kinds of synthetic compounds
that make it into the
cosmetic industry,
like sodium laurel sulphate
and others sudsing agents that
are used in detergents that
are used in shampoos and body
lotions, all this kind of stuff.
>>The skin creams that
you buy are almost all
loaded with toxic chemicals.
Most of them contain
fragrance chemicals.
We did a lab analysis of
a popular perfume product
and showed that it contains 21
different toxic, potentially
carcinogenic chemicals, none of
which are listed on the label.
So if you think about it,
how do you want healthy skin?
Do you want your skin to
be treated with nutrition
from the inside out?
Or do you want to coat
it with petrochemicals
and toxic chemicals and
artificial fragrance products
from the outside, which
will be absorbed in?
And then, they will get into
your liver, and your heart,
and your kidneys,
and your brain.
And they will cause
disease inside.
>>It's not just
what you're eating.
It's also what's eating you.
So where is the sweetness
missing in your life?
What else is going on?
What kind of suffering
are you going through?
What's going on between
this ear and this ear?
>>There's an interesting
study called the ACE Study,
the Adverse
Childhood Experiences
Study done by Vincent Feliti at
Kaiser Permanente in San Diego.
And they were working
with obese people.
And what he's come
to the conclusion of
is that obesity is
not the problem.
It's a solution.
So let's take a look at that.
It's a solution
to chronic stress.
It's a solution, in many
people, to sexual abuse,
dysfunctional family
situation, and so on.
>>I've talked to so
many people that have
been overweight all their life.
And I always ask them,
when did it start?
When I was four years old.
What happened when you
were four years old?
Well, my father was an
alcoholic and he beat me.
Or we moved to another country.
And I was really scared.
>>Let's look at where
you're not satisfied.
Are you in a dead-end job?
Are you married to somebody
who treats you like crap?
Are you suffocating under the
weight of too much pressure
in your life?
Are there some old
residual traumas and dramas
that need to be attended to?
Some unfinished business
that's getting you stuck
and making you keep
spinning your wheels
that will, ultimately, encourage
you to make poor food choices?
Dear diary, today
I feel very sad.
And I want to eat everything.
Right?
I think a lot of people,
when they're stressed or sad,
they turned to food for
comfort, especially,
old foods that they
ate growing up,
meatloaf, mashed
potatoes, cakes, cookies,
all of those things that you
ate or you got from your mom.
And it goes back to
that time of being
nurtured and
nourished and whatnot.
One of the best pieces
of advice I ever
got from a spiritual teacher
was, if you're upset,
don't eat.
And I think it's so profound.
Because oftentimes when we're
upset, we have no connection to
whether or not we're satiated,
whether or not we're full.
Because we're trying
to fill a void
that can never be
filled with food.
>>So the type of
stresses are like nothing
that you would ever associate
necessarily with weight gain--
sleep deprivation, dehydration,
mental and emotional stress.
You're driving to work.
You're stuck in traffic.
Your boss is going
to get mad at you.
That's causing chemistry.
Every time you have a mental
or an emotional stress,
it's causing chemistry in
your body, real chemistry.
And when that chemistry is the
same chemistry as a famine,
your body's going to
want to gain weight.
It's trying to protect you
from the stresses in your life.
It doesn't know what to do.
We're living in a world where
it's so different from the way
it was thousands of years ago
where all we had to worry about
was not being eaten
by a tiger and where
our next meal is coming from.
And now, we got
to worry about how
we're going to pay our
mortgage or our credit card,
or if our kid's going
to go to school,
or if the world's
going to get blown up.
And all of these stresses
are causing chemistry.
And our bodies are
trying to protect us.
And people get so mad.
We get so mad at our bodies.
Like, we hate our
bodies because we
think our body is
trying to sabotage us
or is out to get us.
No, it's a protection mechanism.
It's nothing more.
>>When you're under
stress, you have
the stress hormones,
cortisol and epinephrine.
And if you've ever seen
anyone on steroid medication,
such as prednisone, you see that
the first thing that happens
is they gain 20 to 30 pounds,
no matter what they're eating.
In fact, when your
cortisol stress
hormone levels are
high enough, they've
documented the fact
that looking at a donut
actually changes
your metabolism.
The number one best way
to digest stress hormones
is sleep.
And deep sleep will
metabolize excess cortisol
and epinephrine better
than anything else.
Now, I want people
to try something.
If you've been
under stress and you
sleep for only three
to four hours a night,
you will gain two pounds
just from that alone.
Because the stress
increases fluid retention.
So I call those liquid pounds.
You want to take care
of those liquid pounds
before they turn into real
pounds, which they inevitably
will.
Many, many people are
sleep deprived now.
So I'd first like to give people
permission to sleep and sleep
as long as you need
to whenever you can.
So that's sleep.
The second thing that
really metabolizes
stress hormones-- and this is
how the body was designed--
is exercise.
When you lift weights or
you simply take a long walk,
you're doing a couple things.
One is you're increasing those
feel-good hormones that you've
normally gone to sugar for.
So exercise, taking a walk
three, four times a week,
is as good as anti-depressants
for mild to moderate
depression.
I mean, this is insane.
You just exercise alone.
And you know, when
you get out there
and you do it and you're
in the fresh air and so on,
you feel much better.
And that's biochemical.
Anything that is
sustainably pleasurable
will decrease stress hormones.
Laughter decreases
them enormously.
So I would recommend
that you have
some funny movies lying around.
And that's been clinically shown
to improve immunity and also
decrease pain.
>>A lot of people look at my
before and after pictures,
and they wonder how I did that.
I can tell you that the
body that I have now
is exactly the body that
I visualized having.
And I'm not sure
that's a coincidence.
And I thought about, why is
visualization so powerful
for weight loss?
And visualization for
body change in general,
because Arnold
Schwarzenegger said
he used to use
visualization to become
a professional,
champion bodybuilder.
And he was one of the
best bodybuilders.
And I've talked to
so many other people
that have been so successful
with visualization.
But what I've realized
is visualization
is like a language
that you can use
to talk to your subconscious.
Your subconscious is
the part of your brain
that's in charge
of a lot of things.
But one of the things
that it's in charge of
is your body's
unconscious processes.
How much oxygen you need
is not a conscious thought.
You don't think, I
should breathe more.
That's unconscious.
How much your heartbeats
is unconscious.
And how fat or thin you should
be is an unconscious decision,
but it is a decision.
And the problem with this
subconscious or unconscious
part of us is that it
doesn't speak English.
And so we're being run by a
brain that we can't talk to.
But what I realized
is visualization
is like a language
that you can use
to talk to your unconscious.
Because just like you can't talk
to someone who doesn't speak
your language--
say you have to go
to the bathroom in
a foreign country,
you could ask 1,000 people
where the bathroom is.
They won't tell you.
But if you draw a
picture of a bathroom
on a napkin in the
restaurant or something
and show it to anyone,
instantly, they
know what you mean.
Visualization or symbols is the
universal language for people
that don't speak your language.
And your body doesn't
speak your language.
When you make a visual
image of the way
you'd like to look-- it
could be you at another time
when you were fit and
healthy and happy,
or it could be somebody else.
It doesn't matter.
Just look at the
picture for 30 seconds
like, if you're looking
through the picture
in an unconscious way.
Don't look at the
picture with your eyes.
Look through it.
Let your subconscious absorb
it for just 30 seconds.
And then, close your eyes
and either see yourself,
feel yourself, imagine
yourself being in that body.
Imagine yourself
walking on the beach
with that body,
whatever way you can do.
And you do it when your mind is
calm and powerful and relaxed.
Your subconscious understands.
And it understands that
it doesn't need fat
and that it's
confusing the stresses.
Because it really
doesn't know what
to do with the stresses
of modern life.
Do I get fatter?
Do I get thinner?
How do I protect this
person who's so scared?
So sometimes it uses fat.
But when you can communicate
with your subconscious and say,
no.
That's not the answer.
I appreciate it.
But that's not what's happening.
Then, OK.
I'll turn the fat programs off.
[SNAP] Just like that,
everything changes.
>>Unfortunately, most
people-- and when
I say most that's like
over 50% of people--
get out of that morning shower,
have a look at themselves
in the mirror when
they're alone.
And they're not happy
with what they see.
They're just not happy.
And they start out their day by
berating themselves and telling
them they're a loser,
and that they're no good,
and they've got to lift their
game, and all these things.
Now, if you had someone who was
with you 24/7, that was just
whispering that in
your ear all the time,
I don't know about you, but
that wouldn't last five minutes
with me.
Yet, we allow ourselves
to do it to ourselves.
>>There's a group that I go
to that says, let us love you.
Do you love yourself?
And when I first heard
that, I was so sad.
I became aware of the
depth of my self-loathing.
Death seemed-- at least,
I wasn't suicidal.
I occasionally had
bouts with thoughts.
But it was like,
I wasn't suicidal.
But I welcomed death.
Like, you know what?
Just turn the switch, turn
off, flick the off button.
I'm ready for the
big sleep, man.
But it's at that point that the
genesis of willingness emerges.
And that's the genesis
of willingness.
And that crack, as
Leonard Cohen says,
it's the cracks that
lets the light in.
And that crack let the light in.
>>So something miraculous,
something powerful
happens when you take
care of yourself.
You realize that
you are precious.
You become in love with
yourself, basically.
And it shines.
It overflows to others.
It becomes contagious.
You give others the permission
to be in love with themselves
and in love with life.
>>What was the most important
thing to keep off the weight?
What do I believe was the
most crucial component?
Without question, love.
Love for myself and
love for other people.
>>And when you think about
love, what love is really,
is love is safety.
Because when you're
zero years old,
when you're a couple weeks
old, if your mother doesn't
love you, you're going to die.
Your mother has to take care
of you and has to feed you.
You are totally helpless.
So from the moment we're born,
we equate love with safety.
So when you feel
like you're not being
loved because your partner
or a boyfriend or girlfriend
doesn't love you, or because
someone out there doesn't
love you, then your
primal feeling of safety
is being triggered.
That activates a stress.
That's going to make you
want to hold onto weight.
1,000 years ago, if the
community didn't love you,
you were excommunicated.
The tribe didn't love you,
you're excommunicated.
And so, then you die.
Because you can't survive on
your own in a tribal world.
So it's totally hard-wired into
us that love equals safety.
>>I actually think that the
concept of loving yourself
is key to all of it.
Without that, nothing else
is going to be sustainable.
Because if you have a
message in your head,
I'm a worthless piece
of crap, and my life
doesn't count for anything,
and I'm always a failure,
and I screw up all the time,
and I'll never be good enough,
and I'll never make it,
and no one loves me,
the first thing
you do is you know
that they're probably there.
And Louise Hay of Hay House
has a wonderful practice.
And if anyone would just
really do it for 30 days--
and for years I wrote it
out on a prescription.
OK, so here it is.
I accept myself
unconditionally right now.
I'd write it on
the prescription.
Their job was to post it on
their bathroom mirror and twice
a day, look deep into
their eyes and say--
>>I accept myself
unconditionally right now.
>>Then, you wait for
the messages to arise.
You're a piece of shit.
There's no way you
can love yourself.
Look at your thighs.
You see all that cellulite?
What about that butt of yours?
You're 30 pounds overweight.
You're unmarried.
You're a middle aged
woman with cats.
There's nothing
acceptable about you.
That's what's going to come up.
That's OK.
If you do this for 30
days, by about day 28,
something shifts inside.
And you begin to believe it.
Because you're planting
a new affirmation.
Rudyard Kipling said, I am
by nature, a dealer in words.
And words are the most powerful
drug known to humanity.
So you are giving yourself
different messages.
And when you start
to do that, you
begin to develop--
like a muscle--
this witness-self that
listens to you talk.
And the stronger that
witness-self gets,
the healthier you get.
As a doctor, let me tell
you what self-love does.
It improves your
hearing, your eyesight.
It lowers your blood pressure.
It increases pulmonary
function, cardiac output,
helps wire in the musculature.
So if we had a rampant
epidemic of self-love,
then our health care costs
would go down dramatically.
So this isn't just some little
frou-frou New Age notion,
oh, you know, love
yourself, honey.
This is hard-core science.
>>So you can improve your life
and your mind and your mindset.
Your outlook on
life can improve.
You've got to ask
just, basically,
three simple questions.
Where does my food come from?
What went into the food, in
terms of attitude or care
or love or compassion?
And then, thirdly,
what is my intention
of doing with the food?
Is the food to support
me for a good purpose?
To do something productive?
Or is it just entertainment?
>>Your body is
designed to be healthy.
Health is the natural state.
And if we let our
body do what it
wants to do in an environment
where all the foods are
healthy choices--
all of them-- we
don't have to be concerned
with these things anymore.
And we can live without
fear of weight gain.
And we can live without fear
of degenerative disease.
[CELLPHONE BEEPING]
>>Hi.
>>Oh, hey.
[CLEARS THROAT]
>>I'm sorry, did you,
uh, say something?
>>Actually, it doesn't
really matter anymore.
[MUSIC PLAYING]